.Dd
.Dt TX 1
.Os TexOps
.Sh NAME
.Nm tx
.Nd TexOps CLI to build LaTeX documents in the cloud
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm login
.Nm
.Cm init
.Op Fl -texlive Ar version
.Op Fl -compiler Ar name
.Op Fl -main Ar file
.Nm
.Cm build
.Op Fl -no-cache
.Op Ar name ...
.Nm
.Cm status
.Nm
.Cm token create
.Op Fl -name Ar name
.Op Fl -expires-in Ar duration
.Op Fl -no-expiry
.Nm
.Cm token list
.Nm
.Cm token delete
.Op Ar name
.Nm
.Cm version
.Nm
.Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the command-line client for TexOps, a cloud service that compiles LaTeX
documents.
It uploads project files, triggers remote builds, and downloads the resulting
PDFs.
Both interactive use on a developer workstation and headless use in CI
pipelines are supported.
.Sh GETTING STARTED
.Bl -enum
.It
Authenticate with the TexOps service:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx login
.It
Inside a LaTeX project directory, create a
.Pa .texops.yaml
configuration file and commit it to version control:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx init
.It
Build the project:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx build
.El
.Pp
For CI pipelines, commit
.Pa .texops.yaml
to the repository and set the
.Ev TX_API_TOKEN
environment variable instead of running
.Cm login .
.Sh COMMANDS
.Ss login
Authenticate with the TexOps service using the device code flow.
A one-time code is displayed and the verification URL is opened in a browser
automatically when possible.
After authorization completes in the browser, the session JWT is
stored locally.
.Ss init
Create a
.Pa .texops.yaml
configuration file in the current directory.
Recursively discovers
.Pa .tex
files containing
.Ql \edocumentclass .
In interactive mode, discovered documents are presented for selection.
In non-interactive mode, all discovered documents are included automatically.
.Pp
The interactive prompts for TeX Live version, compiler, and documents
require both stdin and stdout to be a TTY.
When either is not a TTY, the defaults are used:
.Cm texlive:2021 ,
.Cm pdflatex
as the compiler, and all discovered documents.
.Pp
Flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -texlive Ar version
TeX Live distribution version
.Pq e.g.\& Qq texlive:2021 .
Skips the interactive version prompt.
.It Fl -compiler Ar name
LaTeX compiler.
Must be one of:
.Cm pdflatex , xelatex , lualatex , latex , platex , uplatex .
Skips the interactive compiler prompt.
.It Fl -main Ar file
Used as the main TeX file only when recursive discovery finds no documents
.Pq i.e.\& no .tex files containing Ql \edocumentclass .
This flag does not override discovered documents; it is only used as a
fallback.
Defaults to
.Pa main.tex .
.El
.Ss build
Build one or more documents defined in
.Pa .texops.yaml .
Positional arguments select documents by name; when none are given, all
documents are built.
On success, each built PDF is downloaded to the local output path defined in
.Pa .texops.yaml .
.Pp
If
.Pa .texops.yaml
does not exist and stdout is a TTY, an interactive prompt offers to run
.Cm init
first.
When stdout is not a TTY, the build fails with an error.
.Pp
Flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -no-cache
Rebuild without using the remote build cache.
.El
.Ss status
Show authentication status including email
.Pq when available ,
authentication method, and token expiry.
Always exits 0, even when not authenticated or the session has expired
.Pq see EXIT STATUS .
.Ss token create
Create a new API token for use in CI pipelines or other non-interactive
environments.
The token value is displayed once and cannot be retrieved again.
.Pp
Flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -name Ar name
Name for the token.
Required in non-interactive mode; prompted interactively otherwise.
.It Fl -expires-in Ar duration
Token expiry duration.
A positive integer followed by
.Ql d
.Pq days
or
.Ql y
.Pq years ;
maximum 10 years.
For example:
.Ql 30d ,
.Ql 90d ,
.Ql 1y .
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl -no-expiry .
One of
.Fl -expires-in
or
.Fl -no-expiry
is required in non-interactive mode.
.It Fl -no-expiry
Create a token that does not expire.
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl -expires-in .
.El
.Ss token list
List all API tokens with their name, prefix, expiry, last-used date, and
creation date.
.Ss token delete
Delete an API token.
When a
.Ar name
argument is given, the matching token is deleted after confirmation.
When stdout is not a TTY, this confirmation defaults to yes.
When no argument is given and stdout is a TTY, an interactive selection list
is presented; if there are no tokens, a message is shown instead.
In non-interactive mode, a token name argument is required.
.Ss version
Print the
.Nm
version and exit.
The same output is available via
.Nm Fl -version .
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The project configuration file
.Pa .texops.yaml
is created by
.Cm tx init
with a minimal set of keys:
.Cm project_key , texlive , compiler ,
and a
.Cm documents
list where each entry has
.Cm name
and
.Cm main .
Additional keys described below are optional and can be added manually.
.Ss Top-level keys
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm project_key
Unique identifier for the project.
Generated automatically by
.Cm tx init .
If omitted,
.Cm tx build
generates one and writes it back to
.Pa .texops.yaml
before building.
.It Cm texlive
.Pq required
TeX Live distribution version
.Pq e.g.\& Qq texlive:2021 .
Must be a non-empty string.
Not validated against a fixed set of versions.
.It Cm compiler
LaTeX compiler.
Must be one of:
.Cm pdflatex , xelatex , lualatex , latex , platex , uplatex .
Defaults to
.Cm pdflatex
if omitted.
.It Cm api_url
Override the API endpoint URL.
.It Cm documents
.Pq required
A non-empty list of document definitions.
.El
.Ss Document keys
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm name
.Pq required
Unique identifier for the document.
.It Cm main
.Pq required
Path to the main TeX file, relative to
.Cm directory
.Pq or the project root if Cm directory No is not set .
Must not escape the project root.
.It Cm directory
Subdirectory containing the document sources.
When set, the build runs relative to this directory.
.It Cm output
Output PDF path.
Defaults to
.Cm main
with a
.Pa .pdf
extension.
For example, if
.Cm directory
is
.Pa sub
and
.Cm main
is
.Pa doc.tex ,
the default output path is
.Pa sub/doc.pdf .
Must not escape the project root.
.It Cm compiler
Per-document compiler override.
.It Cm texlive
Per-document TeX Live version override.
.El
.Ss Validation rules
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Cm texlive
is required and must be a non-empty string.
.It
.Cm documents
is required and must be a non-empty list of mappings.
.It
Each document requires a unique
.Cm name
and a non-empty
.Cm main .
.It
.Cm main , directory ,
and
.Cm output
must not escape the project root.
.It
Document-level
.Cm compiler
and
.Cm texlive
override the top-level values.
.It
Configs with a top-level
.Cm main
key
.Pq old format
are rejected with a migration hint.
.El
.Ss Example configuration
.Bd -literal -offset indent
project_key: "aBcDeFgHiJkLmNoPqRsT12"
texlive: "texlive:2021"
compiler: "xelatex"

documents:
  - name: "paper"
    main: "paper.tex"
  - name: "appendix"
    main: "main.tex"
    directory: "appendix"
    output: "appendix.pdf"
    compiler: "lualatex"
    texlive: "texlive:2019"
.Ed
.Sh AUTHENTICATION
.Nm
looks up credentials in the following order:
.Bl -enum
.It
The
.Ev TX_API_TOKEN
environment variable.
.It
A JWT in the credentials file.
.It
A JWT in the system keyring.
.El
.Pp
.Cm tx login
stores the session JWT in the system keyring.
If the keyring is unavailable, the credentials file is used as a fallback.
.Pp
The credentials file is a YAML file with a single key:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm jwt
The session JWT obtained by
.Cm tx login .
.El
.Pp
The file is created with mode 0600 inside a directory with mode 0700.
.Pp
For CI pipelines, create an API token with
.Cm tx token create
and set it as
.Ev TX_API_TOKEN .
.Sh FILE UPLOADS
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Pa .git/ ,
.Pa .texops.yaml ,
and
.Pa .txignore
are always excluded from uploads.
.It
Only the project-root
.Pa .gitignore
is loaded; nested
.Pa .gitignore
files are not used.
.It
.Pa .txignore
files can exist in nested directories with local scope; negation patterns
are supported.
.It
Only files the server reports as missing are uploaded, using hash-based
comparison.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TX_API_TOKEN
API token for authentication.
Takes priority over all other credential sources.
.It Ev TX_API_URL
Override the API endpoint URL.
Takes priority over the
.Cm api_url
configuration key.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
When set to an absolute path, the credentials file is stored at
.Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/texops/credentials.yaml .
Relative values are ignored.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa .texops.yaml
Project configuration file in the current directory.
.It Pa .txignore
File exclusion patterns, similar to
.Pa .gitignore .
Can appear in any project subdirectory.
.It Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/texops/credentials.yaml
Credentials file when
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set to an absolute path.
.It Pa $HOME/.config/texops/credentials.yaml
Default credentials file location.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Success, including help and version output.
.It 1
Command failure, including parse errors, configuration errors, build failures,
and runtime errors.
Note:
.Cm status
exits 0 even when not authenticated or the session has expired.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Build a specific document:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx build paper
.Pp
Rebuild from scratch without cache:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx build --no-cache
.Pp
Create an API token for CI:
.Pp
.Dl $ tx token create --name ci-main --expires-in 90d
.Pp
CI pipeline snippet
.Pq assumes .texops.yaml No is committed :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export TX_API_TOKEN="$TEXOPS_TOKEN"
tx build
.Ed
.Pp
Multi-document configuration and build:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# .texops.yaml
project_key: "aBcDeFgHiJkLmNoPqRsT12"
texlive: "texlive:2021"
compiler: "pdflatex"

documents:
  - name: "thesis"
    main: "thesis.tex"
  - name: "slides"
    main: "slides.tex"
    directory: "presentation"
    compiler: "xelatex"
.Ed
.Pp
.Dl $ tx build thesis slides
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gitignore 5
